## Bias in dataset

A partial solution for VQA was training a model that learns only via the dataset and the question to be biased only
and the large model is mitigated via the biased model.

## Statistical learning

We have to avoid letting the models take incorrect statistical shortcuts.

### Checklist for NLP models

Doing a specific checklist to chekc a model for biases that usually occur.

### Contrast set Gardner et al 2020

What minimum change can we to flip the label.

## Balancing data in-balances

We must provide variance across the dataset or curate it synthetically

### Adversarial filtering (AF)

Generate via LM many possible distractions
A discriminator learns to identify machine-generated options

> Bigger adversarial models pick up subtler correlations

### Dataset cartography

Map of the confidence during training of a model on a specific sample

- Most examples are easy to learn
- Very hard-to-learn examples are probably annotation error
- Training on middle examples let to better generalization

## Revisit - Spurious correlation

What is it?

- In genuine correlation
- UN generalizable Correlation
  Competent dataset the marginal probability for every feature is uniform on all the words

### Battle spurious correlation

- Over-Engineering can provide unncesesary output
  Balancing means losing insights and features.

## Suggested alternatives

- Augment datasets for richer contexts
- Few shot learning
- support interaction

### RLHF vs Instruction tuning

- RL has richer signal than fine-tuning
  RLHF Provides richer output and variance in it.
  RL allows positive score for unseen data during training

> Example : Capital of turkey?
> Ankara, RL Gives positive reward for Ankara and 0 instruction loss
> Istanbul, negative reward and high loss
> I am not sure, medium reward and high loss
> we are able to provide models that aren't binary in someway.

### Fight bias with bias

Balancing hides the problem lets amplify it

- Subtle bias are hard to detect and regulate
  Train on the low loss examples and the mistakes of test set.
