# L1

### Logistics

- Weekly Quizzes 5% Magen for HW
- Each Exercise 25% , best 4 out of 5.

  > email : oshuji2025@gmail.com

  ***

  [ModernOS](/home/daniel/Obsidian/MyMind/Current_Semester/OS/ModernOs.pdf)
  [OS](/home/daniel/Obsidian/MyMind/Current_Semester/OS/designOfUnix.pdf.pdf)

# OS

The operating system is the glue of hardware and application layer.

**An os is a program**

- An environment in which other programs operate.
- It is reactive & resident.
- There is a gray line that splits the OS and Application Layer.
  > I.E File Explorer.
- The OS makes the computer convenient and safe.

## Core Principals of OS:

### Why do we need OS:

#### To run a program

- Control Hardware
- Put your program on a disk
- Programs aren't portable
- Only one program can run without an OS

### Abstraction

- The OS takes messy low-level primitives to high level abstract
  > For example Hardware
- we can store data in \_named files
- Arbitrary size
- Address by byte offset and length
- Hierarchical Dir structure

#### SPOOL

In computing, spooling is a specialized form of multi-programming for the purpose of copying data between different devices.

#### Optimization Terminology

-**Latency** - How long to preform an operation -**Utilization** - Fraction of time cpu is preforming useful tasks -**Overhead** - Excess resuorces to attain a goal .

### Multi Programing / Time Sharing

We assume:

- The cpu is always there.
- CPU is much faster than I/O
- Memory is large enough for many programs.
- Peripherals can access memory directly DMA
- More than one task at any given moment.

### Required OS features

- I/O primitives
- Memory Management
- Scheduler manages flow of jobs
- Spooler for managing slower I/O devices.
- DMA - Direct Memory Access , allows Peripheral Devices Memory Access
  > Question can DMA interfere with OS memory access?
  > Answer there is MMU memory management unit that resolves this issues.
  > We allow for context switch between process when one process is waiting for I/O operation.

### Modern OS's

- Program Execution
- Process Management - The ability to multiprocess
- Memory Management
- I/O and device drivers
- Networking
- Protection and Security
- Error Detection
- Resource Allocation

### Today

Multi cores.

#### Virtualization

- Dividing disk to partions
- Great Example Virtual Machines.
- Different Users and their access.

* VMWare for example.

##### Pros

- VM Snapshot - freeze a copy in a specific state.
- VM Migration - move a vm between devices
- Scaling give a VM more resources.
- Isolation for security.

##### Cons

- Big Overhead.

##### The Cloud

- Provides computing resources , SAS
- Big assumption it that its cheaper for big companies.
